Hey by the end of this lecture you're going to be able to use the bucket tool in order to fill areas
either with a solid colour or a pattern.
Let's crack on.
Hello and welcome back.
In this lecture we're going to be talking about the bucket tool that is the tool that we're going to
use in order to fill in an area with just one colour or indeed a pattern as we see in a few moments.
So first of all we need to find the bucket all.
And there are a couple of ways of doing that.
We can select it in our tool box itself.
And if we find it here's the bucket it looks like it's just tipping over and a bit of paint coming out.
So and we can see there that the short cut is shift and be.
And we can also find it in the Tools menu under paint tools and we can see it's right at the top there.
Bucket fill.
And we can also see a useful list of the other options as well.
And all this is useless of course unless we got ourselves an image.
So I'm going to make sure I go to file new create a 32 by 32 image.
And there we go we're ready to go.
I'm going to zoom in we control shift in Jay so I can see everything we've currently got the airbrush
tool selected some going to go ahead and click on the Phil talk.
Let's go back over to our image and just click the once and it should fill with the foreground colour
the black.
And it does brilliant.
Now we can talk well between the foreground and background colours.
If we have a look at the tool options beneath the mode and capacity we have filled type and we can see
it says control next to it.
So there is a modifier to switch between the foreground and background colours.
If I toggle background colour and come back over to our image and click it will go white.
And if we go back to foreground colour it will go black selects useful.
If youre filling in two colours.
Now if you hold down control you will see that toggle actually switches between foreground and background
colour so I can hold down control it will do the background colour.
I can let go of control and click and it will do the foreground colour and that will speed up your workflow
when you are working with the buckets.
Now if we take a look back over at the tool options we see underneath foreground colour and background
colour field we have pattern fill.
We go ahead and click on that and come over.
We will see that it fills in a pattern in this case.
This pattern is called Pine.
If you click on the little image it gives you a selection of different patterns and a cross on the right
hand side.
Here we see that I've got a tab called patterns if you dont have one you'll have that at it with the
menu just to the right of those.
And if we going to patterns you see it's exactly the same and you can pick different patterns.
I'm going to stick with pine for the moment because it's going to enable me to demonstrate the next
thing I want to cover which is the affected area.
And if we have a look at the tall options you will see the affected area also has a modifier key shift.
And if we press shift it will toggle between one and the other this one and this one.
So the first one that is selected by default is feel similar colours.
Now at the moment if we go ahead and click nothing will happen.
And that's simply because we've got it set on pattern.
If we go and select foreground colour I'm going to change the colour from black to something a bit more
vibrant.
I'm going to go with green.
Very vibrant there.
And I'm going to go back to the Tools Options Now Phil similar colours is going to be affected if things
have a similar colour.
Now that sounds like I'm just repeating myself there but we'll see.
As I click through here anything that's a similar colour gets filled in and you will find that when
you click on some places it's just a single narrow band and when you click on others it fills in more
of that area and you may be wondering why.
Well it means that those colours are similar enough that it's going to start filling across them.
But notice it hasn't gone the same colour it's actually darker or lighter or faded in the middle just
like it was before.
So GIMP has done a crossover between the orange and the lighter orange and made it a green in the lighter
green with kind of an orange tint because of course we're going over the top of that.
Now the threshold between those can be controlled at the threshold.
Dial and quite simply put the higher the threshold the more dissimilar the colours can be when you're
filling stuff in.
So if I set that down at zero I'm going I select the area.
Press control in a and then type in zero rather than trying to slide that down.
Now it means that this orange line going down here.
Notice how it doesn't fill in the top but we have to select that because there's a threshold of zero
so if it's not exactly the same then it will not work if we set up to 100 percent which is 2 5 5 you
will notice that the threshold means that if I click it will fill in the entire image because it means
that all colours in this case are similar to everything else.
If we lower that back down to something sensible.
Oh I've done that before.
If you sometimes you will accidentally click and drag your tabs out.
Not a problem we just put it back in.
Riego.
And if we have a pattonville that's put that pattern back again.
Now we've got an option here to tone this down a little Let's go back down to 49 going to foreground
colour and click that and you see that it fills in most of that because most of that of much of those
colours are actually similar.
And we can see that there are a few bits that are left out and a few bits that are slightly faded.
But of course if we clicked again it would fill that in solid.
Now the Browns to the very left are too dissimilar to actually be filled in from this green itself.
Now it's the values underneath that make up that green that are controlling that.
Now of course if we did want the whole thing to be filled in and we didn't want to mess around with
the threshold we could change that by going back to the affected area.
And so selecting feel whole selection when we go ahead and click it will just fill everything in that's
on the current layer regardless of anything else that's in there.
So if we go back and just pattern fill and come back and foreground colour fill it will just fill everything
in regardless of the threshold setting in fact when you have fill hole selection the find similar colours
in the threshold you cannot adjust them.
It disables that functionality.
Now there is a final option here which is finding similar colours and this will change how the fill
tool works.
And these two are quite fun to play with.
But again they do not work unless you have Phil similar collars turned on some women.
Phil similar colours and get a pattern fill again so we can play.
And the first one is all about transparency so Phil transparent areas.
Now we don't have any transparency at the moment so let's go ahead and create a new layer and we will
see.
I'm going to call this trans test.
We've now got a layover is in just full transparent so let's go ahead with the filter.
We've got Phil similar colours Phil transparent areas.
We've got the tran's test layered turned on and active.
Every click we'll find that it fills in.
Now we've got pattern fill at the moment I'm going to go back to foreground colour fill and click that
and it fills in the entire area.
Of course that is not going to be transparent.
So with that layer selected them to hit the delete key that's made it's cleared that layer.
And now we can see if I turn off the background layer it is the transparent layer and that will now
fill in.
However if we have a delay I am just going to create just a new layer straightaway trans test that's
fine that's exactly what we're doing is labelled it number one.
Now I'm going to disable the viewing of trans test the first one we did and now turn off full transparent
measures.
And I bet you already guess what's going to happen.
Absolutely nothing.
It will not fill.
If it's a transparent area.
Now how can we have a bit more fun with this.
Well we can use sample merged and this enables feeling based upon current visible layers that is important
they have to be on and visible.
Now at the moment we've just got this tran's test and we've got a trans test Anthony that I'm going
to change this to blob because I'm going to make a blob on the screen I'm going to clear the layer make
sure I can see it.
I want to clear the air with the delete key so it's back to not being able to be seen.
I'm going to grab the pencil tool and I think it's set to a larger size Yes it's set to 20 pixels.
I'm literally going to make a blob on the page nothing else.
Now that's done.
If we go up to tran's test one making sure that's selected.
Go back to the fill tool and let's pick a different colour.
What goes well with green will red.
Why not.
And let's go back to the tool options and make sure that sample merge has a tic on it.
Now if we go ahead and click in the BLOB itself we will find that it fills in only the blob in red.
That's kahney use.
What else can we do.
Well we can't fill in the transparent layer yet.
I'm going to go ahead and find a different colour.
I'm going to go for blue.
Red green and blue.
And then tick fill transparently.
So not only is it going to look at the other active layers to see what it can fill in but it's also
going to only fill areas that are similar.
And if it's alferd out if there's transparency it will now fill in the transparency but not touch anything
else.
Now this I put on the same layer some can undo that for the moment just for full demonstration.
I'm going to create a new layer again again tran's test is absolutely fine and I'm going to click in
the transparent area and we'll see that now as I turn these off its left the area that was on a completely
different layer empty.
And what we have essentially done here is created a mask.
The area that is now blue is covering the rest of our image it mythili there's nothing here yet.
If we were to go ahead and turn the background image back on you would see only the background image.
But where it's not masked off by that blue layer that wraps up an overview of the buckets all quite
well.
And of course that leads us nicely onto a challenge.
Okay so your challenge is going to be to create four separate images.
Now the first one to get your teeth into filling something in is just to create a simple flag.
It can be made up one it can be a based upon a real one.
It's entirely up to you.
I'll show you some examples in a moment as to what I'm going to do.
But you guys of course can take your own path if you want to create an offensive weapon for a game.
Create a defensive weapon Icom and then use the fill tool to create a mask for one of your images as
well.
And finally of course I want to see what you guys have been up to so share your four designs at 64 by
64 over in the discussions.
And in front of us here we have four examples I've got my simple flag on the left an offensive weapon.
In this case a sword of course you could pick an axe a bow a gun anything you would like to there.
And then I've got a defensive weapon.
I've used the pattern fill there as you can see and I've created myself a shield.
And then finally I've got a moon I call it werewolf power or whatever you like.
But that moon there has been made with a mask around it so the edge is nice and Chris pulls a video
now and give that a go.
Okay guys welcome back.
Let's now go over into game and go through what I've done to create my examples.
Okay so I have already finished off creating my flag.
And in this one I'm going to jump straight to the masking one.
I'm going to attempt to do a moon a nice a simple one nothing too detailed.
Hmm.
And in this case I need a black background to begin with.
I've already got a background.
When I started the new file I could have said it black straight away but since I'm already got the filter
all in front of me bam background colours done.
Now in this particular case I want to make a cut out of the moon initially and then from there fill
in with the rest of it.
So I'm going create a new layer and that's going to be my moon and I'm going to have the moon a full
moon initially.
So it's go ahead.
I'm going to grab my pink brush tool.
I'm going to set the sides of that paint brush tool to 32.
So it's the entire image width.
And we can see that it's there and I'm just going to click a couple of times to get a nice moon that
fills up the screen quite well.
Perfect.
The next layer I'm going to do I'm going to use the filter all to make a moon mask.
And what this is going to do it's gonna mean that in a moment when I start painting I won't need to
worry about the areas that are black.
And you'll see this work in a few moments I'll turn it on and off.
So you can see the different effect because I want this border to remain totally black.
So I have.
What have we got set.
I need it to fill transparent areas.
Sample merge is absolutely fine that's what I wanted to do.
And just a reminder that sample merge will have a look at everything that's visible to every layer that's
visible.
And then in this case feel based upon everything that it can see.
I'm going to turn off the background layer because I don't need that layer when it's coming to this
feel transparent errors.
I need more areas and I need that set to black.
Now we fill it in.
We have this outline which is brilliant because this means I can use that as a mask which means that
no matter what happens I won't be able to draw over the top of this providing.
That's at the very top.
So I'm going to create a new layer and call it Moonshadow.
So this is a great example here how building it up is non-destructive.
Now Moonshadow is at the very top I'm going to lower it down so the moon mask is always at the very
top.
Now the Moonshadow I am going to use an airbrush to do this.
That's a bit too small I don't want a sharp Cresent like that.
I want it to be a bit straighter So I'm going to increase the size of my brush here not to 900 but to
something like 66.
And this is because I've practiced.
I know that's roughly the right size and I've zoomed down to a little now what's the foreground colour.
It's going to be a black brain.
I'm going to turn on the background again just so I can see it in its total.
Now the reason I'm using the airbrush is so I can click and hold and when I reach about the right area
I can just turn it off and just stop.
I like I like how that's looking I'm going to add a little more darkness to one side.
Now the final thing I'm going to do is make the moon a slightly yellow tinge So I'm going to go ahead
and add in a new layer and are going to call it moon.
And of course you could change this to a red or you could change something else.
Now with the moon tint I am going to set it to a yellow.
And again using the air brush I'm going to make sure my cursor is right in the centre otherwise.
Well that's where the main flow comes from unchecking to click a couple of times now you will notice
that as I've done that it's made the dark area around yellow as well a very dark yellow bellies still
made it yellow nonetheless.
Now because I turned on the moon mask if I turn that back on you'll see that it makes the edge of the
moon.
Sharp once more.
So that's like a hazy night.
And this is a shot.
And now if we have a quick look at our moon in the thumbnail that looks pretty good.
Now the moon shadow itself.
Does it matter if it's at a different place.
Yes it makes a huge difference.
So again the shadow I'm going to turn up or rather put it higher up the chain.
So we've got the moon mask on top of everything.
The shadow underneath that the tent the main bulk of the body and the background.
Now the background doesn't need to be there because it's.
If I turn it off you can see it doesn't look quite as good.
If I turn on.
Much much better.
Okay so I'm going to go ahead here and start making our shield.
Now we don't know too many tools as of yet but there is a way that I can make it relatively straightforward.
So I'm going to start with a new layer on my image and I'm going to basically turn the size of my brush
up until it roughly fills the area.
Now I can't see my brush.
I'm going to turn on the outside again and we can see what's going on and to make sure it's the colour
is black going to make sure I'm on my own outline layer and I need to draw a circle so let's just go
ahead.
I'm happy with that.
It doesn't matter that it's not smack bang in the centre.
That's fine for the moment.
Now we need to go ahead to the eraser at all at this point and find a size that will erase but remembering
to have a hard edge turned on when we do that we should end up with a nice outline for Shield.
And then finally I'm going to make sure it's the eraser tools on one pixel and it's on hard edge and
I'm going to go round now and just need to lay it up so it looks a bit more crisp.
Okay so I have the outline all sorted there and I'm going to go to a new layer and call it a shield.
In this case the main bulk of it is go to the fill.
Now I could actually do a pattern fill.
Let's see if there's anything that fits that is pretty cool.
I don't think I need to do anything else as a shield.
Our Shield needs something in the middle he supports and is going to call it middle.
They probably have a technical name.
I don't have a clue what it is.
And again because this is built up in layers it enables us to adjust it left right and centre.
Let's go back to the pencil tool.
I want this to be absolute.
I've just adjusted it roughly.
Plonk.
Yeah.
I like fat changes to white.
I can see it.
Yeah.
I'm happy with that.
Now I need because I've made this coloured pattern on the edge.
I need something else that fits in the middle here.
Absolutely fine.
Now let's have a look again for the film.
So in options is there anything that roughly Sue turse that one there.
Let's see what that looks like.
That's perfect for me.
Okay.
There we go.
Managed to make some quite detailed objects there.
Now these because they're separate it does enable us at any point to go well background.
Well shall we have a straight green background.
And you just plonk things in or it you to use the wrong tool.
Remember you've got foreground colour and pattern there we get.
So that enables us to go to our background layer and.
Fill it in with different colours obviously something bright like that might not work.
Probably be a bit dimmer if anything.
And again brown on brown is going to make it difficult to see.
So perhaps a different colour like that.
But it all depends on what your spec calls for.
But I'm really happy with how that shields worked.
I'll never change the background colour back to white.
And of course that can be turned off at any point so we've got our transparency there as well if necessary
and it goes for our sword as well as great.
How did you guys get on.
Did you have fun playing with the fill tool.
I hope you can see now that it enables you to fill in vast areas of your image very very quickly not
only with solid colours but with patterns as well.
Make sure you post your results over on the forum and I will see you guys in the next video.